Around the world several gravitational wave detectors are currently
operating and several others are in the planning or construction phase.
Among them are the ground based LIGO, GEO, VIRGO and TAMA instruments, as
well as the planned space borne LISA detector. In the coming years these
detectors will for the first time directly observe gravitational waves
generated by astrophysical phenomena such as the collision of two black
holes. By extracting data about the wave sources, gravitational wave
astronomy will open a new window to the universe.

One of the most promising sources to be observed will be the inspiral and
merger of two black holes. In order to extract information about the binary
system from the measured gravitational wave data, theoretical models of the
orbital motion and the gravitational waves emitted are needed. Yet, the two
body problem in General Relativity still remains unsolved, in the sense that
in General Relativity we to do not have a solution which would be the
analogue of the Keplerian ellipses of Newtonian gravity describing the
motion of two orbiting masses. And while approximations can be used in
either the early or stages of inspiral or the late stages of the merger, no
general analytic solution exists for the case of two orbiting black holes.
Hence it is necessary to perform large scale numerical simulations of the
Einstein Equations to model binary black hole systems. Results from such
simulations will be used to analyze signals of binary black hole inspirals
and mergers from data acquired by gravitational wave detectors. Thus apart
from being a fascinating problem of fundamental importance, the modeling of
binary black holes is also a pressing problem from the detector data
analysis viewpoint. Both these aspects make it very exciting for me to work
in this field.

All such numerical simulations must begin by specifying initial data, which
describe the state of the two black holes before the merger. And these
initial data have to be astrophysically realistic, in the sense that they
have to describe the kind of black hole binaries, which actually exist
somewhere in the vastness of the universe. For example, the initial black
holes must have realistic orbital parameters and also the correct tidal
deformation. I am currently working on combining several approximations to
obtain initial data, which are more realistic. Without realistic initial
data, numerical simulations will make predictions only about highly
idealized unrealistic systems which likely will never be observed.

Once we have computed the initial data for two black holes, we are in
principle set up to numerically simulate their inspiral and merger.
Unfortunately however, this area of research is plagued by unphysical
numerical instabilities that cause computer codes to fail. These
instabilities have so far prevented the long term simulations necessary to
model the complete inspiral and merger of two black holes. While there is a
purely numerical component to these instabilities, the scientific consensus
is that the choice of dynamical formulation (a given way of casting the
Einstein field equations) will play an important role in their control. For
this reason, I am very interested in formulations of the Einstein equations
with better stability properties, such as symmetric hyperbolic formulations.
Currently I am investigating the properties of different formulations in
numerical applications. The aim is to find out which of the formulations is
numerically more stable.
